AB - Multi-level Language Descriptions

With instantiation semantics, the language bridges three levels, see [15].
1. the language specication, or the meta-model,
2. the user specication, or the model, and
3. objects of the model.

OMG Level Examples Grammar example OCL example
M3 = meta languages MOF EBNF MOF
M2 = languages UML metamodel Java grammar OCL language
M1 = models UML model a program a formula
M0 = instances objects of UML classes a run a truth value

3.1 MPS
Meta-Programming System (MPS) [16] is a tool to dene domain-specic languages. It is geared towards professional developers and is often used in a Java
environment. It is written in Java, but can be used with other languages as well.
The mbeddr project [20] has applied MPS to programming of embedded devices
in a C/C++ environment.
The general philosophy of MPS can be explained in connection with the
OMG four-level architecture. The meta-languages (M3) in MPS are predened
by the platform and xed. Being a professional tool, MPS has a large variety of
meta-languages to describe all aspects of languages.
The rst main activity in MPS is the description of a language on M2 using
the M3 languages. This language description is translated by MPS into MPS
internal Java code thereby creating an IDE for the language described. An example is the denition of a Petrinet language with the MPS meta-languages for
structure, constraints, text syntax, transformation, intentions, and behaviour.
The second main activity in MPS is the denition of programs or specications on M1 in the IDE for the language dened on M2. MPS provides a projectional editor starting from the internal objects and showing either a default
view or a language-dened view. If the programs written should be executable,
a transformation has to be provided, typically into Java. If this is the case, then
user programs are transformed into standard Java programs.
Finally, MPS does not care for M0, as it relies on the built-in execution and
instantiation as given by Java (or C++, if C++ code is generated). This way,
M0 need not be handled in MPS.
For the levels M3-M2 and M2-M1, MPS uses its built-in instantiation semantics, which is accessible using an internal language called S (for structure). For
instantiation between M1 and M0, the instantiation semantics of the generated
code is used


Both MPS and LanguageLab claim to be bootstrapped, i.e. the meta-languages
given in them are dened in the platform itself.

MPS bootstrapping is more tricky. The MPS meta-languages are translated
into Java. This Java code is related to several interfaces and stubs for the MPS
tool platform. When these interfaces are used, the platform ensures the correct
result. In addition to the interfaces, MPS also uses the specications in the
languages for cross-referencing and similar purposes.
In order to achieve bootstrapping in MPS, the previous generated code is
stored and used for generating the new version of the code. Then, the new
code is compiled and a new version of the platform is provided. Again, the old
version of the module is used in a read-only way in order to produce the new
one. The trick is to generate the same code as before, in particular the same
concept identiers, because otherwise it would not be possible to connect the
old instances of concepts to the new generated concepts.


Vaclav Pech, Alex Shatalin, and Markus Völter. JetBrains MPS as a tool for
extending java. In Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Principles
and Practices of Programming on the Java Platform: Virtual Machines, Languages,
and Tools, PPPJ '13, pages 165168. ACM, 2013