todo
AB - A Model-Based Approach to Language Integration 
However, in general verifying the consistency across the language boundaries is not possible because tools are not aware of the cross-language semantics.

Combining different languages inside one system can lead to possible inconsistencies across the language boundaries.

LANGUAGE INTEGRATION IN LANGUAGE
WORKBENCHES
Herein we present a preliminary approach to obtain seamless language integration with full tool support in the context of language workbenches.
Our reference implementation uses the Jetbrains MetaProgramming System5
(MPS) but it is not limited to it: it could be implemented also for the Eclipse Modeling Platform [5] or other Language workbenches (e.g., Spoofax [6]) as long as the Language Workbench considered supports the languages of interest.
MPS is a projectional editor: it means that the abstract information underlying the model (something similar to the Abstract Syntax Tree) is persisted independently from the concrete syntax of the language.
This is radically different from what happens with text editors.
There are many benefits with this choice, but a very important one is that no parsing is necessary.
In this way languages can be freely evolved and combined without the risk of obtaining an ambiguous grammar.
The models are then projected, hence they are represented in a form suitable for understanding and editing by the user.
Typically these projections are textual but they could also be graphical.
Different artifacts can be later generated from the models: for example compiled java classes or the concrete XML files to be distributed within the compiled system.
We chose MPS for the completeness of the tool and because some of the authors acquired experience with this environment in the context of the mbeddr project6
.
Moreover MPS is distributed with language plugins which permit to to operate with Java and XML out of the box.

It does not resort on a limited universal metamodel, but instead use the MPS representation of the language, which permits to consider every aspect of the language 

