AB - Modern model-based development approach for embedded systems 

On the other side, models are not new in software development anymore.
Over the past few decades, the software industry has seen numerous analysis and design methods, each with its own modeling approaches and notations.
Better integration of such models and code should significantly increase the opportunity to perform changes via models, rather than simply modifying the code directly [1].
Furthermore, using appropriate modeling abstractions is an enabler for higher reuse and more manageable complexity.
The use of adequate modeling approaches prevent common errors and ensure a high quality. 

Mbeddr provides an implementation of the C language and a set of language extensions specific to embedded systems like state machines, components, decision tables, mathematical notations.
These extensions can be seamlessly combined with C code whenever needed [2].

In addition to code development, the tool provides other domain specific languages like for example for the definition of requirements, product-lines or writing code documentation.

“mbeddr” itself is built on top of the Meta Programming System (MPS) from JetBrains.
The open architecture of MPS allows the set of languages which come with mbeddr to be further extended according to the domain specific needs of its users. 

Using projectional editors.
Changing mind from the traditional way of coding using plain text to the projectional editing approach of mbeddr took around two weeks.
After that it became easier to use this new way of editing.
One found drawback was the restrictions imposed on the copy-paste of code.
Using the automation provided by mbeddr, the coding speed and cleanness of the code were increased. 

 Adaptation and introduction period will be required both by control engineers familiar with CFC diagrams and traditional software developers as mbeddr offer the editing approach differing from both of those.
It is also restrictive in terms of used IDE – since everything in mbeddr is considered as a model (even though it looks like c-code or plain text) and stored in specific format it is not possible to use your favorite text editor, you must stick to projectional editor in mbeddr environment. 

As a result, the identified advantages of the undertaken approach are a) modeling spans from requirements down to code generation and validation; b) available rich set of expressive domain-specific languages; c) seamless integration with versioning control system.
At the same time, we found several drawbacks pointing to significant efforts from practitioners to apply the described approach: a) new languages (totally different from CFCdiagrams) to learn; b) more efforts to support separate development cycle and integration