todo
AB - AdaptiveVLE: An Integrated Framework for Personalized Online Education Using MPS JetBrains Domain-Specific Modeling Environment 

n.
Second, an integrated environment for collecting, processing and adapting was developed using MPS JetBrains as opposed to processing the data using a separate environment (weka libraries).

As a basis for creating adaptive VLEs in our proposed solution, the development of a new set of languages to solve the specific problem has been utilised.
Specifically, external and textual DSLs with code generation that produced XML and Java were developed.

The two environments (MPS and web2py) communicate through XML files.
Specifically, XML output for configuring the implementation of AdaptiveVLE is produced automatically from the AdaptiveVLE DSL and is used as an input to the web2py AdaptiveVLE software implementation 
However, we significantly improved and integrated our previous adaptive VLE DSL [3] using the MPS JetBrains development environment [24] to facilitate the language creation, code generation and user interface 
he data processing and the corresponding learning path adaptation were performed with two other interfaces in the same MPS JetBrains development environment.

MPS JetBrain’s allows the composition of more than one language into the same solution.
This enables language reusability and modular system design which are very important for complex systems.
Through MPS JetBrains’s strong language composition feature [26], we used two DSLs to address the adaptive VLE design and development: the main AdaptiveVLE DSL for the collection and the adaptation stages and the CAF DSL for the data processing part.
The two DSLs: AdaptiveVLE and CAF are ‘‘composed’’ through using the same data files 


Domain-specific languages developed through the MPS Projectional editing environment [24] consist of several main parts: structure, behaviour, constraints, actions, editor 

 The DSLs are superior to the traditional UML
code generation and tooling.
The main reason behind it is the fundamental shift in the focus that differentiates the two approaches.
The domain-specific languages focus on providing an interface for the domain expert that solves the domain problem and leaves the software implementation/tooling to be provided by the DSL development environment .
The result is a language for the domain expert that can be used and maintained by the domain experts without the need of mixing software implementation information. 

The MPS JetBrains generator is providing powerful automation that is very compact and efficient (see Fig. 5)


the actual interface with the domain user is a textual form with all the advantages that projectional editing is offering such as validation, correctnessby-construction etc. [28].

First of all, the advantages of Projectional editing versus the traditional text-based editing are applicable as is detailed in [3].
Projectional editing enables the educator with restrictions and guidance through the fact that ‘‘coding behind the scenes’’ allows only the correct notation to be permitted and the user can edit only the parts that require input from him/her.
This is ‘‘code behind the scenes’’ contains validation, language composition, domain focus and quality of the generated code produced that are a few of the unique elements of domain-specific languages that differentiate them from other automatic code generation tools as stated by Markus Voelter in his book [4] at page 40

In Fig. 4, an improved user interface has been designed according to the previous feedback.
Important usability rules such as using checkboxes instead of asking the user to type ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ were utilized.

To create a copy of a part of a model, in MPS it is as trivial as invoking the ‘‘copy’’ operation on a node:
node<> deepCopy = course.weeklyContent.copy;
student.learningPath.add(deepCopy);
This code was used inside the action that was called from the editor when the educator presses CLICK on a particular part of the screen 

[26]	M.
Voelter and V.
Pech, ‘‘Language modularity with the MPS language workbench,’’ in Proc. 34th Int.
Conf.
Softw.
Eng. (ICSE), Jun. 2012, pp. 1449–1450.
