AB - VODRE: Visualisation of Drools Rules Execution

—Knowledge-based Systems and Expert Systems, in
particular, are expensive to build and difficult to validate and
debug because of their complexity and dynamism. Therefore,
it is not easy for knowledge engineer and domain expert to
identify the gaps and mistakes in knowledge base

. A
wide range of testing frameworks is available for developers
of conventional system, but only a few of them are suitable for
ES testing, validation and debugging

Correctness of an expert system assumes that both the
right system was built and the system was built right [5].
These stages are referred to as validation and verification,
respectively
Proper validation of an expert system must
ensure that both code base and knowledge base produce correct
solution. n. Domain rules and reasoning processes are to be
tested, as well.

 This often includes a careful
analysis of large blocks of hard-to-display-on-the-screen data.
Scrolling distracts the attention of the expert from investigation. Furthermore, a domain expert is not necessarily supposed
to be familiar with the system and specialised software

Baumeister[5] suggests DDTree (derivation/dialog tree) - a
powerful tool for ES validation and visualisation of reasoning.
DDTrees are able to present both final and intermediate
solutions in an easy-to-read intuitive way. Successful test cases
are coloured in green, erroneous cases are red. New test cases
are shadowed until test is launched. Tree-like diagram may be
printed and inspected by an expert in subject area. Branched
structure of chart allows analysing the reason of failure based
on incoming findings.


Another visualisation method is proposed by Tavana[10].
He offers PNs (Petri Nets) for dynamic system representation
and rule derivation. It overcomes the drawback of derivation
trees and allows analysing system in dynamics.

that engineers use testing tools as well as visualisation tools
(CHECKA and PIKA, respectively, in their case).

Drools production rule system, using an enhanced implementation of the Rete algorithm, was chosen as a rule
engine. Drools supports the JSR-94 standard for its business
rule engine and enterprise framework for the construction,
maintenance, and enforcement of business policies in an organisation, application, or service. Drools is considered to be
one of the most developed and supported platforms. It has a
number of knowledge representation ways. The main and the
most wide-spread of them is a decision representation language
(DRL), which is used in production system development.
DRL is tightly integrated with Java language. Furthermore,
the platform enables to write DSL constructions to make
rules more vivid and easy-to-understand for domain experts.
A detailed description of Drools is redundant as the platform
is well-documented, thus, only features significant for the
OSYST system are stated below

Drools has an advanced decision engine that supports both
forward and backward chaining that allows wider range of
abilities at design stage (a forward chaining is used in our
expert system as it is acceptable when an object is to be synthesised based on the facts). The last but not the least, Drools
platform has database design toolkit referred to as Guvnor,
which is not included in most of other platforms. Guvnor
combines all essential tools for knowledge-based engineering,
such as rule editor, rule storage, test tools, decision tables
and so forth. Furthermore, the described platform has a userfriendly web-interface. Drools is cross-platform, its installation
process is not time-consuming, knowledge bases can be easily
exported and imported, which results in better portability. All
facts considered, Drools platform has many advantages over
the other platforms and meets our needs

can this rule work? rule F1
when
class : Classif ication()
Requirements(focalLength > 50 < 100)
then
$cla


Data about facts inserted and rules
executed is collected by AgendaEventListener and Working
MemoryEventListener from Knowledge API7. Collected logs
are received by client, then analysed and represented in debug
(before this investigation) and in visualisation (now) windows,

Two types of identities are used in reasoning process of the
synthesis: these are rules and facts. Both rules and facts can
be added to working memory, removed from it or changed
(updated). A fact (or a set of facts) make rules to be fired

Expert systems are complex artifacts that are difficult to
develop and test.




[7]	R. Knauf, A. J. Gonzalez, K. P. Jantke, “Validating rule-based systems: a complete methodology“, in Proc. IEEE SMC’99 Conf., 1999, pp. 744749
[9]	A. Preece, Evaluating Verification and Validation Methods in Knowledge Engineering, in R Roy (ed), Micro-Level Knowledge Management, Morgan-Kaufman, 2001, pp. 123-145
[10]	M. Tavana, “Knowledge-Based Expert System Development and Validation with Petri Nets“, Journal of Information & Knowledge Management, vol.7(1), 2008, pp. 3746
[11]	J. Baumeister, J. Reutelshoefer, F. Puppe, “KnowWe: a Semantic Wiki for knowledge engineering“, Applied Intelligence, vol.35(3), 2011, pp. 323-344
[13]	N. Prat, J. Akoka, I. Comyn-Wattiau, “An MDA approach to knowledge engineering“, Expert Systems with Applications: An International Journal, vol.39(12), 2012, pp. 10420-10437
