AB - IncA: A DSL for the Definition of Incremental Program Analyses 
We have implemented IncA on top of JetBrains MPS, an IDE that relies on projectional editing, where code changes occur in the form of user-issued AST change requests.
This aligns well with incrementalization because each AST change triggers an incremental update of the analysis results.

Much like our informal description of the relations above, a graph pattern describes sets of related entities through structural constraints on AST nodes and on instances of other graph patterns.

In our implementation based on projectional editing, we receive change events for user-issued AST changes directly from the IDE.  Fine-grained AST change notifications align perfectly with incrementalization and there is no need for a potentially costly parsing step to compute AST differences.
After an AST change, a projectional editor derives a new projection from the AST and displays it to the programmer 
We instantiated the architecture for the Meta Programming System (MPS) using IncQuery [35] as the incremental evaluator.
Both tools are available as open-source software, as is our implementation.2
MPS is an IDE that uses projectional editing [38] instead of a parser-based approach.
When editing the program in a projectional editor, every user edit (for example, inserting an operator) directly corresponds to an AST change.
After an AST change, a projectional editor renders new projection from the changed AST based on projection rules of the AST nodes and displays it to the programmer.
Projectional editing is well-suited for incremental program analysis because the user’s edits directly correspond to incremental AST changes and no incremental parsing is necessary.
Our system reuses the incremental graph pattern matching component of IncQuery.
This component realizes the computation graph presented in Section 2.
The component expects the graph patterns to be specified using the Java API PSystem.

3 We implemented the IncA compiler to translate graph patterns into a PSystem specification.
After startup, IncQuery uses the navigator to initialize its computation graph and to retrieve AST changes.

