AB - Extensible Debuggers for Extensible Languages 

Language workbenches significantly reduce the effort for building such extensible languages by synthesizing a fully-fledged IDE from language definitions.
However, in contemporary tools, this synthesis does not include interactive debugging for programs written with the base language or its extensions.
This paper describes a generic framework for extensible debuggers that enables debugging of the language extensions by definig mappings between the base language and the language extensions.
The architecture is designed for extensibility, so debug support for future extensions can be contributed with little effort. 

Programming languages such as C, Java or Python contain a fixed set of language construct and cannot easily be extended.
The debuggers for such languages can be hand-crafted specifically for the constructs provided by the language.
In contrast, modern language engineering allows the development of extensible languages [14, 13].
This allows users to add new constructs to a language in an incremental and modular way.
These languages are used to describe solutions for technical or domain-specific problems on a higher level of abstraction.
This approach supports domain-specific validation and verification of developed system at the same abstraction level as the problem.
Thus it delivers improvements in reliability 
The foundation is MPS, which supports language definition.
Its distinctive feature is its projectional editor, which unlike textual editors, does not rely on a parser.
Instead, the visual notation is a projection of the Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).
This means, every change performed by the user is directly reflected in the AST.

Defining a language or extension in MPS comprises the following steps: structure (syntax or meta model), the concrete syntax (editor definition in MPS), the type system (for defining and checking typing rules), a generator (for mapping extensions to the base language), various IDE features such as quick fixes or refactorings, and of course the debugger.
This section only discusses aspects important for debugger definition.
For a more detailed discussion of language extension we refer to [13]. 

A particularly important feature of MPS as a language workbench is its support for modular language extension, where an extension lives in its own language module.
While such a module may depend on (and use concepts from) a base language, it cannot invasively change this base language.

Debuggers for extensible languages should provide the same functionality as the corresponding base language debugger.
This includes debug commands (stepping and breakpoints) and inspection of the program state (watches and call stack).


To enable debugging on the abstraction level of extensions, a mapping must be implemented between the base language debugger and the program as represented on the extension-leve 
MPS allows the composition of multiple independently developed language extensions in a single program 
Extensible languages are a good compromise between general-purpose and domain-specific languages because they can grow towards a domain incrementally.
In addition, they enable validation and verification on the problem-level, by reducing propagation of possible errors into base language code.




[14]	Voelter, M., Visser, E.: Language Extension and Composition with Language Workbenches.
In: Companion to the 25th Annual ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, SPLASH/OOPSLA. pp. 301–304.
ACM, New York, NY, USA (2010)

