To enable an efficient implementation of our vision, we have modularized recurring functionality in a set of DSLs and libraries that make up the FASTEN Platform.
Figure 2 shows an overview of the FASTEN architecture.
FASTEN integrates external analysis engines (see bottom of the figure) as black boxes – NuSMV [7], Spin [15] and Prism [22] are integrated as external binaries, the Z3 [10] is integrated via its Java API.
Foundational Libraries.
All languages and functionalities are developed on top of JetBrains MPS plus languages and libraries provided by the MPS-extensions4 and mbeddr-platform5 projects.
We use these language libraries for diagrammatic, tree and tabular notations, for the improving editor usability (via grammar-cells [38]) and for generated code review.
From an implementation perspective this infrastructure proved to be crucial to our approach.
Our Infrastructure: the FASTEN Platform.
In order to facilitate the development of DSLs and the integration of formal analysis tools, FASTEN comes with a set of basic languages and functionalities that can be grouped as follows: 1.
1. Infrastructure: commonly used DSLs such as an expressions language; support for calling external tools, displaying analysis results in the IDE, 
2. Basic modeling: base DSLs for the definition of modeling languages such as architecture, message-sequence-charts or tabular specifications, 
3. Input languages of existing analyses tools: the implementation of input languages (e.g., SMV, Promela, SMTlib, Prism) of the integrated analysis tools.
4. Standard languages: the GSN [18] modeling language for creating assurance cases, the STAMP [23] modeling language for performing hazard analysis and a base language for the specification of textual requirements.
On top of the FASTEN-Platform, we have created DSL extensions to enable more comfortable modeling and verification.
In the following sections we present selected examples of higher-level abstractions and functionalities that have been built so far.
