5 Conclusion
5.1 Technical Advantages and Shortcomings.
MPS provided the means to go for a fully structured DSL while keeping the familiar document appearance (see Fig. 10).
Language composition allowed well-designed and fine-grained decisions on first-class language concepts vs. backward-compatible compromises or low-level constructs.
Intentions provided an easy way to integrate user-controlled pattern recognizers to higher-level language concepts.
We encountered performance issues if MPS showed big root nodes in the editor.
Even more useful editors would have been possible if MPS provided cached access to find all references results.
We did not succeed with implicit type inference, because we could not strictly separate scopes that should infer types from scopes that should only check type compliance.
Importing the existing code base posed the biggest challenge by far.
We succeeded with a multistep approach that ensured early feedback on import issues.
We strongly recommend short feedback loops for any large-scale model import, as processing time grows exponentially with every additional step, and the complexity even of simple transformations gets out of hand quickly.
Both non-incremental C source code import and insufficient model merge technologies forced us to only change the original C sources and reimport the complete code every time.
Improvements in both fields would considerably simplify similar challenges. 
5.2 Project Results.
The users in the IT department are very satisfied with the MPS-based solution.
We consider their early involvement, continuous feedback during development, and early training for both MPS and Subversion vital for the success of the project.
The users profit from guaranteed consistency of the FuMo DSL code they are working with and the executed code.
The turnaround time between a change in a FuMo and testable code is reduced by several orders of magnitude—from days or weeks to seconds.
Complete version control of all artifacts through Subversion assures safe processing and storage of changes.
It streamlines collaboration, both within the IT department and with the external service provider.
Shorter turnaround time and reduced communication overhead lead to higher efficiency and fewer misunderstandings, ultimately speeding up time-to-market and lowering the defect rate.
Both the IT department and the external service provider can focus on their field of expertise: insurance domain knowledge and operational/nonfunctional aspects, respectively.
The MPS-based FuMos are in production for more than 2 years.
Zurich and itemis continue to improve the system, migrate it to new MPS versions, and adjust it to new requirements.
