If the goal of Deuce+ is to make powerful program transformations backed by elegant mathematical ideas accessible to – and authorable by – the everyday programmer, then good usability is of utmost importance.
Every single operation described thus far should be influenced and rooted in not only sound mathematics, but proper usability studies.
Although the development of Deuce+ is currently very early in the design process, there are a few preliminary usability considerations that need to be addressed as Deuce+ develops.
With so many program transformations available to the user (especially including transformations authored by third parties), it is critical that the user be able to find the correct transformation for the task at hand, even if the user does not know its name.
We will need to investigate what mental models users have of the transformations available to them and determine heuristics (likely relating to the structurally selected expressions) and display mechanisms (such as code diffs or animation) for showing them relevant program transformations.
After a transformation has been selected, its output may be hard to decipher, so how does a user know when a program transformation is “correct?” We will need to investigate how to help users be confident (and correct) in their output selections.
The languages underlying the program transformations themselves must also be streamlined and intuitive for end-user transformation authors.
Drawing from interdisciplinary programming language design [3], we will need to design and evaluate the style sheet and transformation specification languages holistically, aiming for providing an experience that supports and encourages expressive and extensible code.
The structured editing user interface introduced by Deuce will need to be improved to support usability improvements such as drag and drop, fluid and dynamic animations, and novel code overlays beyond simple polygons (such as for type information).
Completion of these tasks will ensure that – at every step of the way – the usability of Deuce+ is of the highest priority across all its components, from its graphical user interface to its program transformation authoring and end-user experience.