The life cycle of an application is bound to changes of domain and technical requirements.
Non functional requirements as scalability and availability may lead to a rewrite of the application as is for a new architecture or programming language.
DevOps and Microservices-based Applications (MSA) appear to be an indivisible pair for organizations aiming at delivering applications and services at high velocity.
The philosophy may be introduced in the company with adequate training, but only if certain technological, organizational and cultural prerequisites are present [4–6].
If not, the prerequisites should be developed to guarantee adequate instruments to model and verify software systems and support developers all along the development process in order to deploy correct software.
Microservices allow developers to break up monolithic applications (MA) in a set of small and independent services where each of them represents a single business capability and can be delivered and updated autonomously without any impact on other services and on their releases.
In common practice, it is also expected that a single service can be developed and managed by a single team.
Microservices recently demonstrated to be an effective architectural paradigm to cope with scalability in a number of domains, however, the paradigm still misses a conceptual model able to support engineers starting from the early phases of development.
Several companies are evaluating pros and cons of a migrating to microservices.
Model-driven software development  supports expressing domain requirements regarding contained data, function points, workflows, configurations, requirement tracking, test cases, etc.
by appropriate domain specific languages.
In this respect, this work discusses the provision of an model-driven approach for the automatic migration of monolithic applications to microservices.
In particular, domain-specific languages (DSLs) allow the definition and deployment of microservices, while model transformations are exploited to automatize the migration and the containerization phases.
The implementation of the migration framework is realised by means of JetBrains MPS (briefly, MPS).
MPS is a meta-programming framework that can be exploited as modelling languages workbench, it is text-based, and provides projectional editors.
The choice of MPS is due to the inherent characteristics of MSAs, which are by nature collections of small services that must interacts to satisfy the overall business goal.
In this respect, graphical languages do not scale with the complexity of the MSAs.
Moreover, MPS smoothly supports languages embedding, such that our definition of microservice mining, specification, and deployment phases for the migration that are easily implemented.
As a validation of our approach, we have migrated a simple Java application in the corresponding Jolie microservices deployed inside the Docker container.
