One significant goal for the integrated modeling tool was that the integration is not reduced to a technical combination of both languages UML and ALF but also comprises the user interface constituting a visual integration of different editors such that an easy and fluent usage is feasible.
Although a pretty wide range of models are involved in the background processes, the user should get the feeling of editing one model instead of a collection of models where each of them represents a certain portion of the context.
This section describes the foundations of the implementation with respect to the user interface.
In order to facilitate an integrated user interface, an Eclipse view was created that provides the textual modifications of the ALF operations.
While the class diagram is visible within the graphical editor which constitutes the main editor where the user edits the structure, the behavior is modified textually within the additional view.
Xtext provides tool support to embed generated editors within SWT composites which is used for our tool to embed the text editor within the Eclipse view.
The view contents depend on the user’s actions in the main editor.
If the user clicks an operation or a derived property within the class diagram, the view is notified about the respective edit part and shows the embedded editor with the textual representation of the corresponding ALF operation.
The complete ALF operation is now visible and can be edited as in case of a usual text editor; apart from behavioral modeling concerning the operation body, also the structural model elements related to the operation – i.e., the name, the visibility, the parameter list, and documentation – can be modified textually.
The view provides a button for finishing and persisting the current modification of the respective ALF operation; when the button is clicked, the respective text file is saved, the parsing process of the ALF model is performed and eventually the ALF-to-UML transformation is induced such that the structural changes of the respective operation get visible within the class diagram.
Thus, the integrated tool provides round-trip engineering with respect to structural elements of operations; all other structural model elements are edited within the diagram editor while behavior can only be edited textually.