Gentleman is designed to be lightweight and thus uses a minimalist approach to avoid any extraneous content that would otherwise distract and slow-down the user.
The base editor only comes with a single toolbar with a button to close the editor and a status bar.
Additional buttons can be added in the configuration of the editor.
We distinguish three usage scenarios of Gentleman: (1) definition, (2) edition, and (3) reading.
In (1), the user defines the concepts of a model and the projections as presented in Section 2.
In this scenario, the target user is a language engineer or GUI designer involved in the DSL definition.
For greater flexibility and reuse, he defines projections separately from concepts, thus providing good separation of concern.
This is especially the case when the concepts are defined in an Ecore metamodel.
In (2), the user creates or edits an instance of the DSL.
The editor presents editable fields to add values to the AST of the model.
Figure 3 shows a snapshot in this scenario.
The purpose of (3) is to simplify the projection for users to read the model rather than edit it.
It is a special case of (2) where fields are made read-only and interactive actions are disabled.
For example, widgets to add, remove components, and empty optional attributes are not displayed.
The target users of (2) and (3) are the domain experts of the DSL.
To give users more flexibility during the editing activity, they can spawn as many editors as needed.
This way, they can edit different concepts each in a dedicated space or use different projections simultaneously.
The editors are juxtaposed next to each other and can be positioned as the user wants.
Users can attach a note to any part of the content of the editor.
It is not stored as part of the AST of the projection but as part of the editor.
Notes can be tagged in the form of anchors.
Users can search for tags to quickly navigate to specific locations of the model.
One use of notes is to add comments on a model.
Import and export allow the user to preserve the current state of the model and editor or load a saved one.
The storage medium is a JSON object representing the AST of the model and the projection configuration of each concept.
It also stores configurations specific to the editor, like the toolbar configuration and comments.
Recall that Gentleman is bootstrapped; therefore, it treats any instance being edited like a model.
Internally, Gentleman does not distinguish between a model definition (a.k.a.
metamodel), a projection definition (a.k.a.
concrete syntax), or an instance.
The export stores a reference to each concept and each projection.
It is also possible to save the model in plain text with no formatting or projection by using the print functionnality.
When the language engineer has defined a model and at least one projection for each concept, he can automatically synthesize a projectional editor for his DSL.
One attractive feature of Gentleman is its ability to preview a projection during the editing process.
This allows the designer to view the presentation of the projection associated with the concept and how it integrates with other projections.
It is also possible to edit the previewed projection to see how the design responds to different values entered and improve the user experience.
When the user interacts with a specific projection, a context in the status bar indicates the name and location of the current concept in terms of the structure of the model.
At the top of Figure 2, we see that the currently active field corresponds to the name of a concret concept.
The user can navigate through the model using the TAB key or mouse click.
As a projectional editor, he can only modify editable projections.
For example, in Figure 2, the user cannot remove the central topic; he can only set its name value or add/remove markers.
During the interaction with a field, the user may request the accepted values that can be assigned to the field by hitting the common CTRL+Space key combination.
The response depends on the state of the field and its concept: it pops a dialog showing information or a list of choices if an action is required.
In Mindmaps, the marker attached to a main topic must have been defined as a central topic component.
Therefore, at the level of the main topic, the context assistance lists the marker values defined at the central topic level.
Requesting context assistance for the name of the main topic displays the attribute’s meta-information, including constraints if they were set.
After the user edits a field, an orange, red, or green badge is displayed next to it.
They indicate that a value was modified since it was last in focus, that a constraint of the concept is violated, or that it is valid, respectively.
In Figure 3 a green badge is displayed over the text field to indicate that the value entered is valid.
When a constraint is not satisfied (e.g., the value is not unique), an additional description is fed back to the user, in the form of a dialog if it is purely informational or a choice dialog if further actions can be taken.
As explained in Section 1, the model is always structurally valid.
However, the DSL may have semantical constraints, such as a maximum depth of sub-sub topics.
Gentleman supports reporting semantical constraints violations through its API.
  