4 Using MPS Meta-Languages for Teaching.
MPS has many meta-languages, and not all of them are useful for novices.
Here, we look at how MPS handles the essential concepts introduced in Sect. 3.
4.1 Concepts for Teaching Structure.
Given the concepts for structure in the previous section, EMOF (essential MOF) is a clear candidate to fulfil all the requirements.
Full MOF [38] could also be used, but it includes a lot of advanced concepts that are overkill for students.
The structure meta-language of MPS provides all the needed constructs and some more that are not needed for students and that may disturb the understanding.
MPS is missing an overview of the concepts of the language with their dependencies, as it is easily provided with EMOF class diagrams.
Such an overview is helpful in case students start to work on an existing project or in general need to get an overall understanding of the concepts involved.
Figure 3 shows how an MPS concept declaration covers the needed constructs in relation to an EMOF class diagram.
MPS also allows defining enumerations.
4.2 Concepts for Teaching Constraints.
Constraints (sometimes called static semantics) are restrictions that are checked on the syntax tree after checking the restrictions of the syntax.
The traditional method to specify constraints is OCL [56], which allows formulating (logical) expressions over the abstract syntax.
This is not very domain-specific for the language definition.
A better approach exists for the handling of name resolution in [29].
The structure meta-language captures multiplicity and also allows to define lexical rules using constrained data types; see Fig. 4.
MPS has a general meta-language for constraints covering general constraints including uniqueness and scoping.
In this context, also the behavior meta-language is used.
The general MPS idea of the constraints language relates to a syntax check, where an input that does not match the constraints is not included in the model.
It is possible to define correctness in the sense of static semantics using the type system checking rules.
In the course, the use of checking rules is recommended for general constraints instead of using the constraints meta-language.
The type system meta-language gives a very high-level way to describe types and their connections using inference rules, subtyping rules, and checking rules as shown in Fig. 5.
The most significant abstraction gap is in the handling of name resolution.
MPS handles definitions using INamedConcept, but this is very rigid and cannot be defined after the structure is in place.
References are defined as reference constraints and are code-level, not high-level.
The same is valid for uniqueness.
4.3 Concepts for Teaching Syntax.
There are two main approaches for handling concrete syntax of a language: generation (pretty printer) and recognition (parser).
Editors would typically do both sides.
The editor meta-language of MPS allows the definition of projectional editors, i.e., editors built on the idea of model-view-controller (MVC).
This means that the tool always knows about the elements of the specification, and therefore ambiguity is considered unimportant.
However, as [21] argues, ambiguity might not be essential for the tool, but still for the user.
A check of the ambiguity of the notation could be useful.
handled in the course using separate tools (JavaCC).
Still, the handling of lexical constraints can be used as an example of recognition; see Fig. 4.
MPS editors support a two-way connection between the syntax and the corresponding structure, providing feedback from the syntax analysis in the form of syntax highlighting, error messages, code completion suggestions, etc.
The projectional nature of MPS is well aligned with teaching graphical and textual projectional approaches.
Even though MPS does not provide full graphical editors, the principles are clear enough as can be seen in Fig. 6.
MPS does not allow much notational freedom for the user, so this has to be explained separately as well.
The inspector view of MPS can be used as an example of user freedom, which is not visible in the main notation defined; see Fig. 7.
MPS allows defining editors automatically from the structure as proposed in [22].
This gives a quick win, even though the generated editors often have to be adapted.
Providing high-quality editors in MPS is very advanced and well beyond the capacities of ordinary students.
Here, a much higher level of abstraction would be needed, as shown in [5, 47, 55].
In particular, the division of syntax between the inspector and the regular editor is puzzling for the students and disturbs their understanding.
In the course, it is recommended to avoid using the inspector view when defining a textual representation.
4.4 Tools and Technologies for Teaching Transformation.
There are many tools available to express transformations, and MPS provides a very high abstraction level for transformations.
MPS allows both template-driven and data-driven definitions.
The meta-language generator allows the definition of model-to-model transformations, as shown in Fig. 8.
In contrast, the meta-language textgen provides means for the definition of model-to-text transformations, as shown in Fig. 9.
Model-to-model transformations are simple in MPS, while model-to-text is a bit less convenient.
In particular, the description capabilities are too different between the two kinds of transformations.
4.5 Tools and Technologies for Teaching Execution.
MPS does not provide dedicated meta-languages to handle execution.
There are some possibilities to define debuggers.
Moreover, it is possible to define simulators using the underlying base language (Java).
High-level descriptions of operational semantics as proposed in [33, 40, 44–46, 48] are missing.
Besides, state transitions could be defined on a higher level using ASM [7] or QVT [36].
In the course, the concepts of executions are introduced, and possible implementations in MPS are discussed.
