It has been recognized that the systems of the future in several application contexts will contain in some form or another big data gathering and analysis. A huge amount of data can be collected from Information Technology (IT) and the Internet of Things (IoT) devices, creating the big data era.
However, appropriate analysis and processing of these data is a difficult and complicated task that requires specialized expertise.
Moreover, each application domain has its semantics and peculiarities in the interpretation of data making the problem even more difficult.
Online education and its personalization are no exception.
As an adaptive system application, it consists of three main stages: data collection, data processing and adaptation [1].
In this domain context, the whole adaptive system application is called in the literature learning analytics [2].
Data can be collected through several systems from Virtual Learning Environments (VLEs) to general IT systems with information for each student.
These data collected are pieces of learning evidences in our context.
However, the main IT systems utilized for online education are by far the VLEs.
Blended learning approaches are mainly used to combine online systems with face-to-face teaching in educational institutions.
Pure online education, on the other hand, relies solely on the VLE for the educator-student communication.
Data for learning evidence consist of information collected from these VLEs from student grades to the number of accesses to resources.
Utilizing these data to provide personalization and enhanced student experience is a promising area and especially for purely online education.
In this article, we have developed an integrated framework (extending the work published in our previous conference paper [3]) to mainly assist educators that develop purely online courses utilizing learning analytics in a systematic and ‘‘domain-specific’’ way using domain-specific languages (DSLs) [4].
Specifically, this framework consists of two main DSLs: AdaptiveVLE DSL and Classification Algorithms Framework (CAF) DSL.
A range of data to be collected is given for configuration in the design of the AdaptiveVLE through the AdaptiveVLE DSL.
Then data clearing has to be processed manually.
Once the set of data to be used for the data processing is identified, the Classification Algorithms Framework (CAF) DSL [5] is utilized and students are categorized according to their achievement levels.
According to this information, educators can alter the learning path for individual students to address their individual needs.
There are two types of additional resources to support weak and strong students and the AdaptiveVLE DSL is utilized to alter the learning path accordingly.
Also, in our proposed solution, additional external resources can be utilized to enrich the options available.
This is one of the most effective and simplest forms of adaptation that was chosen as less intrusive to the student and as conforming to differentiation approaches [6].
